Puffin: Add delete-vector-v1 blob type (#11238)
apache/iceberg: format/puffin-spec.md

- `ndv`: estimate of number of distinct values, derived from the sketch.

#### `delete-vector-v1` blob type

> A serialized delete vector that indicates rows of a file that are deleted by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A serialized delete vector that indicates the positions of rows in a file file that have been deleted.
```

Author: Fixed!

> the position encoded in a bitmap. A 1 at position P indicates that the row at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their positions encoded in a bitmap. A set bit at position P indicates that the row at
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A set bit at position P indicates that the row at
```

Author: Done.

- `ndv`: estimate of number of distinct values, derived from the sketch.

#### `delete-vector-v1` blob type

A serialized delete vector that represents the positions of rows in a file that
are deleted.  A set bit at position P indicates that the row at position P is
deleted.

> The bitmap supports positive 64-bit positions, but is optimized for cases where

Reviewer: The `vector`? Not sure if we want to use bitmap here.

The vector supports positive 64-bit positions, but the physical layout is optimized for cases 
in which most positions fit within 32 bits. Positions are divided into 32-bit keys (most significant 4 bytes - do we need to mention endiness here?) and a 32-bit unsigned integer sub-position (some other name here?).  Each key maps to a 32-bit Roaring bitmap which will have the sub-position bit set.

The thing I mostly want to avoid here is using "position" in 2 contexts, once for in the file and once for in the 32-bit roaring bitmap.

Reviewer 2: I agree with using `vector` here instead of bitmap since bitmap is relevant for the serialized representation which is explained further below, or @RussellSpitzer explanation structure also sounds good to me. 

>The thing I mostly want to avoid here is using "position" in 2 contexts, once for in the file and once for in the 32-bit roaring bitmap.

For this, I feel like the explanation that's further below is OK since it draws a distinction between a "key" and the 4 least significant bytes. And then later on for the offset of the blob in the puffin file, I think we'd use the word "offset".

Reviewer: Oh then I think we have 3 instances, I meant

64 bit Position (Global position in data file)
32 bit position (Part of the position in teh data file, but not the whole thing)
and Position within Puffin File

Author: Vector vs bitmap: Updated to use "vector" but clarify above that "bitmap" is often used to mean the same thing.
Position: Updated to use "sub-position" for the 32-bit portion. The position in Puffin is referred to as the "offset".
Endianness: No need to mention because "most significant bytes" is clear and independent of order.

> The bitmap supports positive 64-bit positions, but is optimized for cases where

Reviewer 3: what does "positive 64-bit positions" exactly mean?
does it mean
positions in range 0..(2^64-1) (unsigned 64-bit), or 
positions in range 0..(2^63-1) (positive part of 64-bit integers)

(also, zero is not a positive number, but i assume zero is addressable)

Author: Does it matter? These positions are row positions. There is never going to be a file with that many rows. Many, many other things would fail first.

Author: I've clarified that the MSB must always be 0.

Reviewer 3: > I've clarified that the MSB must always be 0.

thanks

most positions fit in 32 bits by using a collection of 32-bit Roaring bitmaps.
64-bit positions are divided into a 32-bit "key" using the most significant 4
bytes and a 32-bit position using the least significant 4 bytes. For each key
in the set of positions, a 32-bit Roaring bitmap is maintained to store a set
of 32-bit positions for that key.

To test whether a certain position is set, its most significant 4 bytes (the
key) are used to find a 32-bit bitmap and the least significant 4 bytes are
tested for inclusion in the bitmap. If a bitmap is not found for the key, then
it is not set.

> The serialized blob starts with a 4-byte magic sequence, `D1D33964` (1681511377

Reviewer: Is there any significance to the sequence here? Is this for compatibility purposes? I don't have a problem with that, just wondering

Author: I also need to add a length field and a CRC checksum for compatibility. The CRC seems useful and Delta readers assume that the length of the vector + magic bytes is written. I think for compatibility, it's worth it to just add those fields.

stored as 4 bytes, little-endian). Following the magic bytes is the serialized
collection of bitmaps. The collection is stored using the Roaring bitmap
["portable" format][roaring-bitmap-portable-serialization]. This representation
consists of:

* The number of 32-bit Roaring bitmaps, serialized as 8 bytes, little-endian
* For each 32-bit Roaring bitmap, ordered by unsigned comparison of the 32-bit keys:
    - The key stored as 4 bytes, little-endian
    - A [32-bit Roaring bitmap][roaring-bitmap-general-layout]

The blob metadata must include the following properties:

> * `referenced-data-file`: location of the data file the delete vector applies to

Reviewer: location is path here correct? Does it have to be absolute or can it be relative? Thinking slightly ahead here

Reviewer 2: Good point, yeah we probably need to qualify that this is an absolute location to tighten up the spec?

Reviewer: That would preclude us from using relative pathing in the future, but I'm not sure we are ready to have that debate yet

Reviewer 3: Relative paths would be awesome to have. This aside, good point, the format and interpretation of this string should be clear.

Author: Like other locations in Iceberg, this is the fully-qualified location. To avoid any problems, I'll state that this should match the location of a data file in table metadata.

> * `referenced-data-file`: location of the data file the delete vector applies to

Reviewer 3: I wasn't quite aware that we gonna put the deletion vectors in the puffin files. So now they gonna be mandatory for readers, right?
How this compares to alternatives considered? (i believe following delta example we could have deletion vectors inline in manifest list)

Reviewer 4: an interesting discussion on the same : https://docs.google.com/document/d/18Bqhr-vnzFfQk1S4AgRISkA_5_m5m32Nnc2Cw0zn2XM/edit?disco=AAABUXU4vh4

Reviewer: Technically a reader just needs to be able to read the vector since the addressing is all within the delete file manifest still.

My TLDR on the reasoning from Anton was, we make less files, but we still get the ability to individually address and attribute blobs. I would check the proposal @singhpk234 linked to

Reviewer 3: thanks @singhpk234 @RussellSpitzer . So these Puffin won't be registered on the table-level, like the table stats files are, right?

Author: @findepi, Puffin is used to make the files self-describing, but it is not necessary to read the Puffin footer in order to apply the delete vector. We are basically just using it as a container for DVs.

Reviewer 3: so the idea is that manifest will link to portions of the file (by path+offset+length)?
but the referenced-data-file stays important property.

i am concerned that, if it's self-describing but portions of information isn't used at execution, this leaves space for bugs to creep in. the self-descibing but unused portion may end up containing incorrect information, without anyone noticing (either for files produced by Iceberg itself, or by other implementors/query engines, who use Iceberg project for compatibility test purposes).

Reviewer 5: PR #11302 has a sample implementation. The magic number and CRC in the blob ensures we read a correct byte sequence. The Puffin footer will be helpful to debug potential issues or during table maintenance. It enables us to store the referenced data file next to the blob in addition to storing it in the metadata.

> * `cardinality`: number of deleted rows (set positions) in the delete vector

Reviewer: May also make sense to store the sequence number here as well.

Reviewer 6: I think the BlobMetadata section requires refactoring as it currently calls out both snapshot and sequence number as required fields.

Reviewer 5: The plan was to set sequence number and snapshot ID to -1 as they will be assigned during commits. We should update this PR to include this.

Reviewer 6: It's minor but it seems better to change the fact that it is required in blobmetadata then keeping a useless field (this also seems generally more consistent with how missing snapshot data is handled elsewhere)

Reviewer 5: I am +1 for exploring what it would take to make those fields optional. My opinion would depend on the amount of work needed.

- `ndv`: estimate of number of distinct values, derived from the sketch.

#### `delete-vector-v1` blob type

A serialized delete vector (bitmap) that represents the positions of rows in a
file that are deleted.  A set bit at position P indicates that the row at
position P is deleted.

The vector supports positive 64-bit positions, but is optimized for cases where
most positions fit in 32 bits by using a collection of 32-bit Roaring bitmaps.
64-bit positions are divided into a 32-bit "key" using the most significant 4
bytes and a 32-bit sub-position using the least significant 4 bytes. For each
key in the set of positions, a 32-bit Roaring bitmap is maintained to store a
set of 32-bit sub-positions for that key.

To test whether a certain position is set, its most significant 4 bytes (the
key) are used to find a 32-bit bitmap and the least significant 4 bytes (the
sub-position) are tested for inclusion in the bitmap. If a bitmap is not found
for the key, then it is not set.

The serialized blob contains:

> * The length of the vector and magic bytes stored as 4 bytes, little-endian

Reviewer: and CRC?

Author: No :disappointed:

I also found out that the CRC and this length are big endian. I'm going to look into this more and see what we can do.

Reviewer: I love compatibility and all, but that sounds wrong and since we are also including this in the manifests I think we should change it ...

Author: I talked with the Delta folks and all implementations rely on on these values to check the validity of the deletion vector. Removing this would mean those checks can't be run and would also break compatibility with all older Delta readers. The length is also intended to make the format self-describing. It is made up of these blobs concatenated together.

The CRC is definitely useful and I don't think there's a reason to make minor changes that break compatibility like swapping the endianness. I'd use the same logic for storing the length. While it isn't necessary when embedding these in Puffin, it isn't such a problem that we should break compatibility with older readers, which would limit options later.

Plus if we keep compatibility, then the deletion vector files in both Delta and Iceberg are the same format with the addition of a Puffin footer and magic bytes. At least it would be an option to use to Puffin as a container format later on.

Reviewer: So we will be specifically storing a "delta length" which is the real length - 4 bytes? But in manifests we will keep the full blob length including the crc bytes?

Reviewer 3: > So we will be specifically storing a "delta length" which is the real length - 4 bytes? But in manifests we will keep the full blob length including the crc bytes?

That's... _concerning_ 

> Removing this would mean those checks can't be run and would also break compatibility with all older Delta readers.

I wouldn't be worried about older Delta readers at all.

- compatibility with Delta readers isn't a projec goal, is it?
- compatibility with some old software that we have no control over, shouldn't be a project goal either?

To be clear, it would be nice to reuse valuable concepts from Delta, but we don't need to replicate typos or design issues such as "length is length off by 4".

Reviewer 3: Older Delta readers will never have to read Iceberg Puffin files. Newer software can be made adapted, so that core DV logic is reused even if container formats aren't the same.

Author: > So we will be specifically storing a "delta length" which is the real length - 4 bytes? But in manifests we will keep the full blob length including the crc bytes?

I think it would be the blob length - 8 bytes (4 for the CRC and 4 for the length).

> I wouldn't be worried about older Delta readers at all.
> 
> * compatibility with Delta readers isn't a project goal, is it?
> * compatibility with some old software that we have no control over, shouldn't be a project goal either?

These are good questions to consider and we will need to come to consensus as a community.

I think there is value in supporting compatibility with older Delta readers, but I acknowledge that this may be my perspective because my employer has a lot of Delta customers that we are going support now and in the future.

The main use case for maintaining compatibility with the Delta format is that it's hard to move old jobs to new code. We see a similar issue in Hive to Iceberg migrations, too, where unknown older readers prevent migration because they are hard to track down and often read files directly from the backing object store. I'd like to avoid the same problem here, where all readers need to be identified and migrated at the same time. Doing that requires temporarily producing Delta metadata, which this makes possible.

The second reason for maintaining compatibility is that we want for the formats to become more similar. My hope is that we can work across both communities and come up with a common metadata format in a future version. Maintaining compatibility in cases like this keeps our options open: if we have compatible data layers, then it's easier to build a compatible metadata layer.

Other people may not share those goals, but I think the decision comes down to how much is being compromised for compatibility. I don't think it is too much:
* A 4-byte length field that Iceberg doesn't need
* A 4-byte CRC that is useful to add
* Using big endian for this blob (mixed endian if you consider RoaringBitmap is LE)

Reviewer 6: > The main use case for maintaining compatibility with the Delta format is that it's hard to move old jobs to new code. We see a similar issue in Hive to Iceberg migrations, too, where unknown older readers prevent migration because they are hard to track down and often read files directly from the backing object store. I'd like to avoid the same problem here, where all readers need to be identified and migrated at the same time. Doing that requires temporarily producing Delta metadata, which this makes possible.

This will already be the case for an upgrade to Iceberg V3, where as currently proposed all position delete files will be migrated to DV?  Is it technically harder to do a similar migration of Delta lake to a new version if users would want to interop with Iceberg?

Reviewer 3: This is interesting perspective. If indeed we can generate Delta metadata on top of these newly-written Puffin files and feed that to old Delta readers without any modifications to those old readers, there's certainly some value in it.

@rdblue this discussion is interesting and compatibility capabilities are _potentially_ useul.
Why isn't there "Delta" word in the spec and only one ([unclear](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11238/files#r1796159961)) occurrence of "compatibility"? wouldn't it be useful for better understanding of a) why it's the way it is and b) what a user can do thanks to this?
Without this the spec is complete (context isn't needed for completeness), but confusing. There are some redundant fields (eg length) and a spec implementor may spend some time wondering eg  whether length needs to be validated or ignored.

- `ndv`: estimate of number of distinct values, derived from the sketch.

> #### `delete-vector-v1` blob type

Reviewer 5: We need to mention that these are uncompressed.

Author: Fixed.

> #### `delete-vector-v1` blob type

Author: I think the two are mostly synonyms. I'd probably keep it this way. Does anyone else think this should be changed?

> #### `delete-vector-v1` blob type

Author: This was also raised on the other PR: https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11240#discussion_r1796422257

I'll update it.

A serialized delete vector (bitmap) that represents the positions of rows in a

> file that are deleted.  A set bit at position P indicates that the row at

Reviewer 5: Extra ` ` before `A set bit ...`?

> file that are deleted.  A set bit at position P indicates that the row at

Reviewer: Getting a jump on allowing delete vectors for manifests .... :)

> file that are deleted.  A set bit at position P indicates that the row at

Reviewer 5: True, we may keep this generic for referencing manifests in the future.

position P is deleted.

The vector supports positive 64-bit positions (the most significant bit must be
0), but is optimized for cases where most positions fit in 32 bits by using a

> collection of 32-bit Roaring bitmaps.  64-bit positions are divided into a

Reviewer 5: Extra space here too.

32-bit "key" using the most significant 4 bytes and a 32-bit sub-position using
the least significant 4 bytes. For each key in the set of positions, a 32-bit
Roaring bitmap is maintained to store a set of 32-bit sub-positions for that
key.

To test whether a certain position is set, its most significant 4 bytes (the
key) are used to find a 32-bit bitmap and the least significant 4 bytes (the
sub-position) are tested for inclusion in the bitmap. If a bitmap is not found
for the key, then it is not set.

The serialized blob contains:

> * The length of the vector and magic bytes stored as 4 bytes, big-endian

Reviewer 6: What is length here?  Is it potentially already captured by metadata (e.g. offset/length)

Reviewer 5: It is the length of the bitmap serialized using the portable serialization + 4 extra bytes for the magic number.

Reviewer 6: This seems fairly redundant with offset and length information that we are already storing, even for compatibility purposes I'm not sure why it is needed?

Reviewer: My issue (as noted on the other thread) isn't that the redundancy bothers me, it's that we are probably going to have two values for length. One that includes the CRC in the manifest, and one that doesn't within the blob itself. That's a bit odd.

Reviewer 5: It is true. Puffin footer and manifests will capture the length of the entire blob (4 bytes for bitmapData length, magic number, bitmap, checksum) and this length will only cover the magic number and bitmap.

Reviewer 7: Suggest to use 'combined length'.  On first read , it could be mis-interpreted as 'length :: magic bytes'

Author: Updated to use Szehon's suggestion.

> * A 4-byte magic sequence, `D1 D3 39 64`

Reviewer 6: why is a magic number here if this is already versioned by the blob type?

Reviewer 6: I see this was discussed in https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11238#discussion_r1794250448

IMO, I think trying to converge the specs by taking slightly questionable designs from Delta lake and propagating them to Iceberg seems like not a great choice.  It makes more sense to me to call the existing Delta legacy, and converge onto a representation that both can share.  It seems the core payload is easy enough to transfer and recompute CRC as new data is written.

Reviewer 5: If we were to do it from scratch, I personally would skip the length field and use consistent byte order for the magic number, bitmap, and checksum. The magic number is needed as a sanity check because readers will directly jump to an offset without reading the Puffin footer. Therefore, checking the magic number ensures we are reading what we expect without an extra request to the footer. Using portable serialization for 64-bit Roaring bitmaps is the only reasonable option, so that wouldn't change too. CRC helps catch bit flips if the underlying storage becomes faulty. 

It is still a question for the Iceberg community to whether not including the length and using consistent byte order is significant enough to break the compatibility with the existing Delta spec. It is a bit tricky understand, I will admit that.

@emkornfield, what are your thoughts?

Reviewer 6: > Therefore, checking the magic number ensures we are reading what we expect without an extra request to the footer.

I'm a little skeptical on value here, given we are already labelling this content elsewhere.  The internal consistency of the data structures need to be vetted anyways and probably unlikely to get valid ones if the offset is incorrect.  The CRC32 provides further sanity checks if the structures do appear to be valid.  Its 4 bytes, so at the end of the day there are likely bigger fish to fry.

> It is still a question for the Iceberg community to whether not including the length and using consistent byte order is significant enough to break the compatibility with the existing Delta spec. This layout is a bit tricky understand, I will admit that.

My (non-binding) vote would be -0.1, simply copy and pasting the delta lake spec.  Given the relatively small differences, on the surface it seems that the Delta Lake spec could be revised in a manner to converge with the Iceberg spec without replicating a technical decision.  The likelihood that these actually have any impact, as long as the spec is clear enough is probably minimal.  CRC version probably has the most impact (and I don't have any stats but I assume this would be small).

Reviewer 8: is the choice of little endian to match most processors' architecture to avoid byte swapping on read?

Agree that it would be nice to use consistent byte ordering (little endian). Parquet and Orc seem to use little endian to encode integers too.

I don't fully understand the compatibility part with Delta lake. It is not like Delta lake would use Puffin file directly, right? I assume some conversion is still needed. those meta fields are cheap to convert byte order if needed, as long as we keep the big bitmap vector compatible with the same portable serialization.

Reviewer 6: I believe the intent here is to be byte for byte compatible with Delta Lake deletion vectors so both can be easily read simply given a tuple of: (file URI, offset, length), so no rewrites would be necessary.

Reviewer 5: > I'm a little skeptical on value here, given we are already labelling this content elsewhere. The internal consistency of the data structures need to be vetted anyways and probably unlikely to get valid ones if the offset is incorrect. The CRC32 provides further sanity checks if the structures do appear to be valid.

The CRC is computed on the bytes so it can only catch random bit flips. I do think checking the magic number is a reasonable sanity check which is fairly common in the industry. I'd be curious to hear alternatives.

Reviewer 6: > The CRC is computed on the bytes so it can only catch random bit flips.

I'd flip this on its head and I'd like to understand what use-cases we expect it to sanity check that would fail?  The CRC doesn't just detect bit-flips, it also detects for accidental truncation/enlargement of the range (e.g. if you leave of the last byte, it is very unlikely the CDC check would pass).  If the argument is the CRC will not be checked on most reads, then the consistency of the vectors provides another sanity check (I think it would be quite hard to get random sampled bytes that would fully parse, and implementations should be careful in parsing it here).

>  I do think checking the magic number is a reasonable sanity check which is fairly common in the industry. 

I'm not saying in general it is not useful and even if this case it might be, but magic numbers are typically a file level concept so that readers can determine if the file-type is something they can in fact read (and disambiguate between multiple types of binary formatted data).  In this case this information is redundant with the information in the footer.  For direct reads based on manifest data, I think a reasonable design option would be to introduce a new content type value that reflected 'deletion-vector-v1', which would allow readers to fail earlier if the type is not recognized.

As another example, theta sketches in puffin don't include a magic number (and as far as I [can tell the library by itself](https://github.com/apache/datasketches-java/blob/master/src/main/java/org/apache/datasketches/theta/CompactSketch.java#L281) doesn't add one for serialization).  

Ultimately it is just 4 bytes, so it might not pay to argue too much about it, especially if the community agrees that the compatibility is worth it.

Reviewer 5: While I don’t think the magic number check is critical, I do believe it is beneficial. If things start to fail, we would want to have as much helpful information as possible. Having the magic number allows us to cross check the serialization format without reading the footer and may help debug issues with offsets. It will also be useful if we add more serialization formats in the future. I agree it is unlikely we will be able to successfully deserialize the rest of the content if the offset is invalid, but still. If we end up in that situation, it would mean there was an ugly bug and having more metadata will only help. Overall, it does seem like a reasonable sanity check to me, similar to magic numbers in zstd and gzip.

We once had to debug issues with bit flips while reading manifests. There was no easy way to prove we didn't corrupt the files and it was a faulty disk. The CRC check would catch those and save a ton of time.

I’d propose to keep the magic number and CRC independently of whether we decide to follow the Delta Lake blob layout. The length and byte orders are controversial. There is no merit in those beyond compatibility with Delta Lake.

Reviewer 6: > While I don’t think the magic number check is critical, I do believe it is beneficial. If things start to fail, we would want to have as much helpful information as possible.

There is obviously a balance here (for instance we aren't also adding a magic footer, nor are we using error correcting codes).  Like I said, probably not worth debating too much as it is 4 bytes.

> I’d propose to keep the magic number and CRC independently of whether we decide to follow the Delta Lake blob layout.

I agree a digest is important, I think the main question is which one.  We should probably limit that discussio to the [other thread](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11238/files#r1796204011), and I think it was probably a miss not to include this at the puffin format level or at least directly on the theta sketch.

* The vector, serialized as described below

> * A CRC-32 checksum of the serialized vector as 4 bytes, big-endian

Reviewer 6: It sounds like this is being used for compatibility for some existing bitmap, but my impression (haven't researched this in a while) is that CRC-32C (Castagnoli) as it has machine level instructions for computation (probably not a huge deal for individual use-cases but saving CPU cycles can't hurt).

Reviewer 5: Correct, this choice was driven by compatibility with Delta.

Reviewer: How wildly prevalent are Delta Delete Vectors? Just wondering how much compatibility we are actually getting here or if this is just forward looking?

> * A CRC-32 checksum of the serialized vector as 4 bytes, big-endian

Reviewer 5: This is the checksum of the bitmap data that includes magic bytes + the bitmap, not just the bitmap.

Reviewer: And the Length too right? Or are those bytes skipped?

Reviewer: I checked and it skips the length.

Author: Fixed.

The position vector is serialized using the Roaring bitmap
["portable" format][roaring-bitmap-portable-serialization]. This representation
consists of:

* The number of 32-bit Roaring bitmaps, serialized as 8 bytes, little-endian

> * For each 32-bit Roaring bitmap, ordered by unsigned comparison of the 32-bit keys:

Reviewer 6: nit: it might sense to call out keys here are the leading 32 bits of the 64 bit elements so readers don't need to reference the roaring spec for this detail.  Also, since this is for a delete vector, it might be sufficient to limit the key range to be in the signed range to make Java programmer's lives easier (I don't think in practice we really need the extra bits to have full uint64 range for position deletes.).

Reviewer 6: rereading this is described above

    - The key stored as 4 bytes, little-endian

>     - A [32-bit Roaring bitmap][roaring-bitmap-general-layout]

Reviewer 6: I skimmed through the general layout and I might have missed it but it doesn't seem to include the size of the actual roaring bitmap, this seems like an important detail either way so it is probably worth calling out how clients can get the size of the bitmap.

Reviewer 5: These 32-bitmaps have no meaning on their own. I'd argue we need the ability to skip entire 64-bit bitmaps, which is possible with the proposed layout.

Reviewer 6: I might be misunderstanding the layout, and it is enough of the edge case for this use-case that it doesn't matter but suppose I have 3 bitmaps (e.g. prefix keys 0x00, 0x01, 0x02, which implies at least an 8 row Billion data row file?), it appears one couldn't skip to a 0x01 bitmap without first reading the 0x00 (i.e. don't quite get how this could be random access without loading the entire data-structure)?  If a the layout was instead `<number of prefixes><list of (prefix, bitmap start offset)><bitmap data>` one could randomly seek to the bitmap of interest without parsing preceding ones.  Again given the edge case of having > 4B data files I think this point is mostly theoretical.

I guess the alternative again which is worth discussing is putting an upper bound of `UINT32_MAX` rows on data files which would allow one just use the 32-bit roaring bitmap.  Maybe famous last words but a 4 Billion row iceberg data file should be enough for anyone :)

Reviewer 6: Just to clarify I don't think this is a real concern. We can resolve this comment

Note that the length and CRC fields are stored using big-endian, but the
Roaring bitmap format uses little-endian values. Big endian values were chosen

> for compatibility with existing deletion vectors.

Reviewer 6: What existing deletion vectors?  Isn't this new :)  If this is specifically for compatibility with other table formats we should likely make it explicit

Author: Delta deletion vectors. Deletion vectors are new to Iceberg, but have been used in Delta for quite a while.

Reviewer 6: Yes, we should make this explicit to document the source of them.  Deletion vectors likely exist in other systems as well.

Author: Done.

> The blob metadata must include the following properties:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The blob's `properties` object must include the following metadata.
```

Reviewer 6: it took me a a few seconds to understand where this is stored on blobmetadata.  This seems clearer to me but is mostly a nit.

Author: Updated.

> * `referenced-data-file`: location of the data file the delete vector applies

Reviewer 6: Would it make sense to include min row and max row in the delete vector here (we can avoid doing any more work if the row-group being processed is outside this range).  This might also be cheap enough to extract from the data itself, so it might be a non-issue.

Reviewer 5: The problem is that it will be in the footer, so it will require an extra request.
Are there good use cases in mind, @emkornfield?

Reviewer 6: I was assuming footer parsing first.  I think if the intent to jump directly to a location from manifests, then it would serve no purpose (I added some questions in this regard on the table spec changes).

Reviewer 6: One follow-up question if we aren't planning on reading the footer, why are we storing cardinality?

Reviewer 5: The cardinality is part of making these delete files self-describing and is up for discussion. I can image some maintenance operations compacting DV files without touching the rest of the metadata.

Reviewer 6: How will it be consumed in general though?  Is this another sanity check value?  Or is there a specific use for it?

Author: Cardinality is also stored in the Iceberg metadata entry as record count.

key.

To test whether a certain position is set, its most significant 4 bytes (the
key) are used to find a 32-bit bitmap and the least significant 4 bytes (the
sub-position) are tested for inclusion in the bitmap. If a bitmap is not found
for the key, then it is not set.

The serialized blob contains:
* Combined length of the vector and magic bytes stored as 4 bytes, big-endian
* A 4-byte magic sequence, `D1 D3 39 64`
* The vector, serialized as described below
* A CRC-32 checksum of the magic bytes and serialized vector as 4 bytes, big-endian

The position vector is serialized using the Roaring bitmap
["portable" format][roaring-bitmap-portable-serialization]. This representation
consists of:

* The number of 32-bit Roaring bitmaps, serialized as 8 bytes, little-endian
* For each 32-bit Roaring bitmap, ordered by unsigned comparison of the 32-bit keys:
    - The key stored as 4 bytes, little-endian
    - A [32-bit Roaring bitmap][roaring-bitmap-general-layout]

Note that the length and CRC fields are stored using big-endian, but the
Roaring bitmap format uses little-endian values. Big endian values were chosen
for compatibility with existing deletion vectors.

> The blob's `properties` must:

Reviewer 6: I think we still need to reconcile snapshot_id/sequence number?

Author: I added a paragraph that states they are not known and should be set to -1 for Puffin v1 (allowing us to make them optional in a later version).

* Include `referenced-data-file`, the location of the data file the delete

>   vector applies to; must be equal to the data file's `location` in table

Author: These are synonyms and I don't think that this is confusing. Is there a concern that you have about using both terms?

  metadata

> * Include `cardinality`, the number of deleted rows (set positions) in the

Reviewer 6: We should document that this should be equal to the number of rows listed in the manifest.

Author: This spec is independent of manifests, so I don't want to add that here. I also think that it's clear in the table spec that `record_count` for a delete vector is its cardinality.

  delete vector

> * Omit `compression-codec`; `delete-vector-v1` is not compressed

Author: Fixed.
